                                             RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for
                                                    Controllable Traffic Scenarios

                                             Wenhao Ding*1,2 , Yulong Cao*2 , Ding Zhao1 , Chaowei Xiao2,3 , and Marco
                                                                             Pavone2,4
                                                                       1
                                                                         Carnegie Mellon University
arXiv:2312.13303v2 [cs.LG] 13 Aug 2024




                                                                           2
                                                                              NVIDIA Research
                                                                              3
                                                                                UW-Madison
                                                                          4
                                                                             Stanford University
                                                                     {wenhaod, yulongc}@nvidia.com


                                                 Abstract. Simulation plays a crucial role in the development of au-
                                                 tonomous vehicles (AVs) due to the potential risks associated with real-
                                                 world testing. Although significant progress has been made in the visual
                                                 aspects of simulators, generating complex behavior among agents re-
                                                 mains a formidable challenge. It is not only imperative to ensure realism
                                                 in the scenarios generated but also essential to incorporate preferences
                                                 and conditions to facilitate controllable generation for AV training and
                                                 evaluation. Traditional methods, which rely mainly on memorizing the
                                                 distribution of training datasets, often fail to generate unseen scenarios.
                                                 Inspired by the success of retrieval augmented generation in large lan-
                                                 guage models, we present RealGen, a novel retrieval-based in-context
                                                 learning framework for traffic scenario generation. RealGen synthesizes
                                                 new scenarios by combining behaviors from multiple retrieved examples
                                                 in a gradient-free way, which may originate from templates or tagged sce-
                                                 narios. This in-context learning framework endows versatile generative
                                                 capabilities, including the ability to edit scenarios, compose various be-
                                                 haviors, and produce critical scenarios. Evaluations show that RealGen
                                                 offers considerable flexibility and controllability, marking a new direction
                                                 in the field of controllable traffic scenario generation. Check our project
                                                 website for more information: https://realgen.github.io.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         Simulation is indispensable in the development of autonomous vehicles (AVs),
                                         primarily due to the considerable risks associated with training and evaluating
                                         these systems in real-world conditions. The biggest challenge in simulations lies
                                         in achieving realistic driving scenarios, as this realism influences the discrep-
                                         ancy between AV performance in simulated and actual environments. Although
                                         advancements in high-quality graphical engines have significantly enhanced the
                                         perception quality of simulators, the realism of agent behavior remains con-
                                         strained because of the complicated interactions among naturalistic agents. To
                                         counteract this issue, data-driven simulation has emerged as a promising ap-
                                         proach in the realm of autonomous driving, which leverages real-world scenario
                                         datasets to accurately generate the behaviors of agents.
2      W. Ding et al.

    With the rapid achievement of deep generative models [29] and imitation
learning algorithms [32], current data-driven simulations [23, 38] can generate
scenarios that closely mimic human driver behavior. However, the effectiveness
of these simulations in accelerating the development of AV is limited. This limi-
tation stems from the need for scenarios that meet specific conditions tailored for
targeted training and evaluation. Achieving such controllability in simulations
is challenging due to the complex nature of driving scenarios, which involve
intricate interactions, diverse road layouts, and varying traffic regulations.

    In pursuit of controllabil-
ity, existing work applies ad-
ditional guidance, typically in
the form of constraint func-
tions [16,64] or languages [49,
63], to pre-trained scenario
generative models. Regular-
ization of the generation pro-
cess through these tools is
straightforward and effective,
yet it encounters two prin-
cipal challenges. First, the Fig. 1: (a) Conventional methods make the model
training of scenario generative memorize the data distribution for generating. (b)
models typically utilizes natu- In contrast, our method employs a retriever to
ralistic datasets, which might query datasets (including external data obtained af-
not encompass the specific ter training) and uses a generative model to generate
scenarios desired as per the scenarios by integrating the information from the re-
                                trieved scenarios.
control signals. Even if such
scenarios exist within the dataset, they are often omitted because of the rarity
of long-tail data. The second challenge is that the representation of the guid-
ance to the generative model may not be sufficiently expressive to accurately
depict complex scenarios, such as specifying intricate interactions among multi-
ple vehicles, using language. These limitations underscore the need for a more
sophisticated and nuanced framework for controllable scenario generation.

    Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) [8, 25], which enhances the genera-
tive process by querying related information from external databases, represents
great potential in the domain of large language models [37]. In contrast to con-
ventional models that memorize all knowledge within their parameters, as shown
in Figure 1(a), RAG models, shown in Figure 1(b), learn to generate compre-
hensive outputs by retrieving pertinent knowledge from a database, based on
the input provided. A notable aspect of RAG is the ability of the database
to undergo updates even after the model has been trained, allowing continuous
improvement and adaptation. This flexible framework offers possibilities for con-
trollable scenario generation by using appropriate template scenarios as input
and facilitating the generation that is not only realistic but also aligned with
specific training and evaluation requirements.
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios      3

   In this work, we present RealGen, a retrieval augmented generation frame-
work for generating traffic scenarios. This framework, as shown in Figure 2,
begins with the training of an encoder through contrastive self-supervised learn-
ing [42] to allow the retrieval process to query similar scenarios in a latent em-
bedding space. Leveraging this latent representation, we subsequently train a
generative model that combines retrieved scenarios to create novel scenarios.
The key contributions of this paper are summarized below.
 – We develop a novel contrastive autoencoder model to extract scenario em-
   beddings as latent representations, which can be used for a wide range of
   downstream tasks.
 – We propose the first retrieval augmented generation framework using the
   latent representation tailored for controllable driving scenario generation.
 – We validate our framework through qualitative and quantitative metrics,
   demonstrating strong flexibility and controllability of generated scenarios.


2     Related Work
2.1   Traffic Modeling and Scenario Generation
Research on traffic modeling using generative models has received considerable
attention in recent works. Notably, ScenarioNet [38] and Waymax [23] employ
large-scale data to train imitation learning models, facilitating the generation
of realistic multi-agent scenarios in simulations. SceneGen [50] utilizes the Long
Short Term Memory [30] module to autoregressively generate the trajectories for
vehicles and pedestrians based on provided maps. Additionally, TrafficSim [47]
learns the multi-agent behaviors from real-world data, and TrafficGen [18] pro-
poses a transformer-based autoencoder architecture to accurately model complex
interactions involving multiple agents. MixSim [48] builds a reactive digital twin
and finds safety-critical scenarios with black-box optimization. RTR [61] models
reactive behaviors of vehicles using the combination of reinforcement learning
and imitation learning.
    Numerous prior studies have employed adversarial generation to synthesize
rare yet critical scenarios. L2C [17] utilizes a reinforcement learning framework,
where the reward for scenario generation is based on the collision rate. To en-
hance the realism in purely adversarial generation methods, MMG [15] incor-
porates the data distribution as regularization. Further developments such as
AdvSim [54], AdvDO [7], and KING [26] integrate vehicle dynamics to directly
optimize the trajectory to find critical scenarios.
    The proliferation of large language models (LLMs) has led to recent ap-
proaches in generating traffic scenarios with language as conditions to follow
instructions from humans. CTG++ [63] replaces the gradient guidance process
of CTG [64] with cost functions generated by an LLM. Leveraging the power
of GPT-4 [59], this framework can generate diverse motion data with language
conditions. Additionally, LCTGen [49] also harnesses the strengths of GPT-4
to generate a heuristic intermediate representation of scenarios from language
4      W. Ding et al.

inputs. Subsequently, a generative model pre-trained on open-source datasets
generates various scenarios with this representation as inputs.

2.2   Retrieval-augmented Generation
Information retrieval (IR) [33] is the procedure of representing and searching
a collection of data with the goal of extracting knowledge to satisfy the query
of users. Predominantly utilized in search engines and digital libraries [43], IR
primarily deals with the information stored in textual formats. Recently, IR
has extended across diverse sectors, notably enhancing the quality of outputs
in areas such as language modeling [3, 39], question answering [25, 62], image
creation [2, 11], and the generation of molecular [55].
    One intuitive usage of the retrieved information is to enhance input data
through several methods, such as merging the original data and retrieved data [37],
employing attention mechanism [3], or extracting skeleton [6]. The rationale be-
hind retrieval systems stems from the impracticality of encoding all knowledge
within model parameters, especially considering the dynamic nature of knowl-
edge that evolves with human activities. Consequently, the capability to access
external knowledge databases can significantly improve the precision and quality
of generated responses, as evidenced in applications involving LLMs [3, 37].
    Another usage of retrieved data, particularly pertinent to this study, involves
the controllable generation by integrating desired features retrieved from the
dataset. In [35], the authors generate product reviews with controllable informa-
tion about the user, product, and rating. Similarly, the process of story creation
can be viewed as a blend of external story databases with selected text frag-
ments [57] Furthermore, [55] explores the controllable generation of molecules to
meet various constraints, utilizing a database comprising simple molecules that
typically meet only one of these constraints.

2.3   Self-supervised Feature Learning
The necessity for manual labeling in supervised learning often results in human
biases, extraneous noises, and labor-intensive efforts. Therefore, the paradigm of
self-supervised learning (SSL) [46] is garnering heightened interest, particularly
for its promising applications in language modeling and image interpretation.
SSL algorithms usually learn implicit representations from extensive pools of
unlabeled data without relying on human annotations. Generally, this line of
research can be bifurcated into two categories [60]: generative SSL and discrim-
inative SSL.
    In the domain of generative SSL, models employ an autoencoder to convert
input data into a latent representation, followed by a reconstruction process. As
an illustrative example, Denoising Autoencoder [53], an early example of this
approach, reconstructs images from their noisy version to extract representative
features. Another technique in this field is masked modeling, extensively uti-
lized in language models such as GPT-3 [4] and BERT [14], which predicts the
masked token to gain a semantic understanding of the text. More recently, the
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios           5

Masked Autoencoder [27] has emerged as a powerful framework, demonstrating
its efficacy across a variety of downstream tasks.
    Discriminative SSL typically optimizes a discriminative loss to learn repre-
sentations from sets of anchor, positive, and negative samples. Without ground-
truth labels, these pairs are often constructed through solving jigsaw puzzles [41]
or making geometry-based prediction [20]. A prominent example of discrimi-
native SSL is contrastive learning, which brings samples from the same class
closer while distancing those from different classes. Representative works such
as MoCo [28] and SimCLR [10] learn embeddings by capturing invariant features
between original data and its augmented variants. Additionally, InfoNCE [42], a
method grounded in noise contrastive estimation [24], is widely used due to its
effectiveness.


3     A Latent Representation of Scenario

A crucial element within the retrieval system is the selection metric for data
retrieval, which is typically implemented through a distance function between
the query sample and the candidate samples in the database. Unlike text, which
can be converted into word embeddings, traffic scenarios encompass sequential
behaviors and intricate interactions among entities, complicating the establish-
ment of a similarity metric for these scenarios. Consequently, in this section, we
introduce a scenario autoencoder to extract latent representations that facilitate
the assessment of similarity between various traffic scenarios, a vital component
in our RAG framework.


3.1   Scenario Definition

Each scenario is characterized by the trajectories τ ∈ RM ×T ×5 , encompassing
M agents over a maximum of T time steps. The trajectory of each agent is
composed of parameters [x, y, v, c, s], signifying position x, position y, velocity
v, cosine of the heading c, and sine of the heading s. The initial state of these
entities is denoted as τ0 ∈ RM ×5 . Furthermore, the map is encapsulated by m ∈
RS×4 , composed of S lane segments. The attributes of these points [xs , ys , xe , ye ]
correspond to the starting and ending positions of each segment.


3.2   Scenario Autoencoder

Autoencoders [44] are used to learn compressed latent representations of high-
dimensional data, where an encoder projects the data into latent code and a
decoder reconstructs the code in the data space. Given that traffic scenarios
encompass spatial and temporal dynamics from multiple agents, we design a
hierarchical encoder structure alternating between spatial and temporal layers
based on transformer architecture [51]. As depicted on the left of Figure 2, our
design incorporates three encoders for behavior, map, and initial position.
6       W. Ding et al.




Fig. 2: Left: the training pipeline for the encoders and decoder aimed at learning
latent embeddings of scenarios. A contrastive loss is applied to behavior embeddings to
ensure invariance to absolute positions. Middle: the training pipeline for the combiner
with frozen encoder and decoder parameters. We use K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) to
retrieve scenarios similar to a template scenario in the dataset and use the retrieved
behaviors to reconstruct the template scenario. Right: the generation pipeline with a
retriever and a generator.

     First, we design a behavior encoder Eb with a spatial-temporal transformer
structure that comprises Le temporal transformer encoders (Encoderit ) and Le
spatial transformer encoders (Encoderis ), where i ∈ {1, . . . , Le }. The trajectory
τ is first transformed into a latent embedding zb , where H denotes the hidden
dimension, through a Multiple Linear Perception (MLP) module. Subsequently,
an alternating encoding procedure extracts spatial and temporal features from
zb . To preserve temporal information, we add a sinusoidal positional embedding
(PE) to the embedding before employing the temporal transformer. To retain
distinct agent information and further compress the behavior feature, we calcu-
late the mean of the latent embedding across the temporal dimension, resulting
in the final behavior embedding zb ∈ RM ×H . Besides the behavior encoder, we
also process the map information represented by lane vectors with the attention
mechanism [51]. Similarly to the first step in Eb , we project m to the latent space
with an MLP module. Then we apply a multi-head attention module (MHA) with
layer normalization (LN) [1] to acquire the map embedding zm ∈ RS×H with a
learnable query embedding qm .
     In the decoder, a spatial-temporal transformer architecture, similar to the
behavior encoder, is designed to obtain the behavior embedding zb through Ld
times encoding. Given that zb lacks the temporal dimension, we first replicate
it T times and then add a PE before entering it into the temporal transformer
encoder. Throughout the decoding process, the map embedding zm is injected
by a cross-attention mechanism: zb ← zb + MHA(zb , zm , zm ). MHA(Q, K, V ) is
the multi-head attention with Q, K, V representing query, key, and value:

                    \begin {split} &\text {MHA}(Q, K, V) = \text {Concatenate}(h_1,...,h_i)W^O, \\ &h_i = \text {Attention}(QW^Q_i, KW^K_i, VW^V_i), \end {split} 
                                                                                                                                                                     (1)
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios        7


 Algorithm 1: Details of Encoder and Decoder
 1 Behavior Encoder Eb (τ ):              14 Initial Pose Encoder Ei (τ0 ):
 2    zb ← MLP (τ ) // projection          15     zi ← MLP (τ0 ) // projection
 3    for i in [1, ..., Le ] do           16      return initial pose embedding zi
 4        zb ← Encoderit (PE + zb )       17 Decoder D (zi , zb , zm ):
 5        zb ← Encoderis (zb )            18      zr ← zb + MHA(zb , zi , zi )
 6    zb ← mean (zb )                     19      for i in [1, ..., Ld ] do
 7    return behavior embedding zb        20          zr ← Encoderit (PE + zr )
 8 Map Encoder Em (m):                    21          zr ← Encoderis (zr )
 9    Initialize a learnable query qm     22          zr ← zr + MHAi (zr , zm , zm )
10    zm ← MLP (m) // projection          23      τ̂ ← MLP (zr ) // projection
11    zm ← LN (MHA (qm , zm , zm ))       24      return reconstructed trajectory τ̂
12    zm ← LN (zm + MLP (zm ))
13    return map embedding zm



where W O , WiQ , WiK , and WiV are learnable parameters. The last component
of the decoder is an MLP that projects the hidden embedding back into the
data domain, resulting in the reconstructed trajectory τ̂ . To train the encoders
and decoder, the mean square error is used as the reconstruction loss, expressed
as Lr = |τ̂ − τ |2 . Comprehensive descriptions of the encoding and decoding
processes are provided in Algorithm 1.
    It is important to note that, while the current design of the autoencoder is
sufficient for acquiring compressed representations of scenarios, these represen-
tations are not invariant to the absolute coordinates and the order of the agents.
This limitation can lead to substantial embedding distances between similar sce-
narios. To address these issues, two enhancements are proposed and detailed in
the following section.


3.3   Invariant feature with contrastive loss

To enhance the representation of scenario similarity in the behavior embedding
zb , we employ contrastive learning to acquire invariant features. Specifically, we
integrate InfoNCE [42] as an additional loss function Lc , which optimizes cate-
gorical cross-entropy to distinguish a positive sample from a batch of negative
samples. In practice, for a query embedding zb , a positive sample zb+ is generated
by applying random rotation and translation to the original scenario τ, m. Mean-
while, negative samples Zb− are selected from the remaining samples in the same
batch. In conventional InfoNCE, to bring zb and zb+ closer together, the inner
product is calculated between the embedding zb and the set zb+ , Zb− , employing
cross-entropy loss to identify the index of the positive sample.
     To ensure that the ordering of the agents does not affect the outcomes,
zb ∈ RM ×H should exhibit permutation invariance across the dimension M .
Otherwise, simply stacking them into a one-dimensional vector could erroneously
represent distinct scenarios as significantly different. To establish permutation
8       W. Ding et al.

invariance, we adopt the Wasserstein distance W2 [52] as a more suitable met-
ric than cosine distance for assessing the similarity. Taking zb as a distribution
representing M individual behaviors, the intuition behind this choice is that the
Wasserstein distance identifies the minimal adjustments necessary for behaviors
in one scenario to reflect those in another. With such a powerful tool, we have
the following contrastive loss:

                   \mathcal {L}_{c} = -\sum _{z_b} \log \frac {\exp \left [ -W_2(z_b, z_b^{+}) \right ]}{\sum _{z'\in \{z_b^+, Z_b^-\}}\exp \left [ -W_2(z_b, z')\right ]}.                                               (2)

    The implementation of this loss results in the behavior embedding zb lacking
absolute coordinate data, making the decoder incapable of accurately recon-
structing the precise trajectory. To handle this problem, we add the initial poses
τ0 of all agents as a supplementary input for the decoder. We encode these poses
into zi with an MLP encoder Enci , and then integrate it into the decoder with an
MHA module zr ← zb +MHA(zb , zi , zi ). Additional specifics regarding the initial
pose encoder are detailed in Algorithm 1. In the training stage, the objective is to
minimize a combined loss function L = Lr + λLc , where λ serves as a weighting
factor for contrastive loss and is uniformly set at 0.1 for all experiments.

4     Retrieval Augmented Scenario Generation
The autoencoder structure introduced in Section 3 builds a one-to-one gener-
ation framework, which still needs additional modules to support the retrieval
augmented generation, which is a many-to-one framework. In this section, we in-
troduce a module called Combiner, which takes input behavior embeddings from
multiple scenarios and outputs the combined embedding. To train this module,
we designed a KNN-based training pipeline that forces the model to learn to
combine and edit existing scenarios.

4.1   The Training of Combiner
Unlike the trajectory prediction task [45] which has ground truth as the opti-
mization target, the objective in training the combiner is to learn the alignment
of behaviors in the retrieved scenarios with the initial pose and the specified
map. A well-trained combiner should be able to compose behaviors from these
retrieved scenarios, thereby generating new scenarios that have a resemblance
to all the retrieved scenarios. This type of objective aligns with the concept of
meta-learning, or ‘learning to learn’, as described in [31].
    Within our training framework, for a given query scenario τ, m in the dataset,
we initially utilize the behavior encoder to obtain zb and then use KNN to
identify K similar behavior embeddings from the database, denoted zret =
[zb,1 , ..., zb,K ]. Building on this, we propose a model comprising two MHA mod-
ules as the combiner:
                                      \begin {split} & z_{rag} \leftarrow z_i + \text {MHA}(z_i, z_{ret}, z_{ret}), \\ & z_{rag} \leftarrow z_{rag} + \text {MHA}(z_{rag}, z_m, z_m), \end {split} \label {eq:rag_map} 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (3)
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios              9

where zi ← Ei (x0 ) and zm ← Em (m) are the initial pose embedding and the
map embedding of the query scenario. Gradients are stopped for zi and zm .
Assuming that the K nearest scenarios adequately represent the query scenario,
it should be feasible to reconstruct the behavior of the query scenario, zb , using
the retrieved scenario, zrag . Consequently, we employ the following loss function
as our training goal:
                           \mathcal {L}_{rag} = \|D(z_i, z_{rag}, z_m) - \tau \|_2,    (4)
wherein the parameters of the decoder Dϕ remain fixed during training. Es-
sentially, this training method is designed to learn an "inverse" operation of
the KNN, aiming to reconstruct a query scenario that closely resembles all K
retrieved scenarios in the database.

4.2   The generation pipeline
The pipeline for scenario generation, as delineated in Figure 2, is categorized
into retriever and generator components. The generation process is expedited
by pre-processing all scenarios in the database using a behavior encoder, which
yields behavior embeddings that facilitate efficient similarity computation.
    The retriever enhances the versatility of generation by dividing the process
into two stages. In the initial stage, users can choose a set of template scenarios
that depict specific conditions. These may include manually annotated scenarios
with tags denoting actions like left or right turns, enabling the generation of ad-
ditional scenarios under similar tags or even a combination thereof. In addition,
templates can include critical and interesting scenarios collected from real-world
data. Solely relying on these templates for generation could be limited, which is
mitigated by incorporating a secondary phase, which employs a KNN approach
to fetch high-quality scenarios from a vast and unlabeled database to augment
adaptability.
    Subsequently, the generator, comprising a combiner and a decoder, follows
the same inference as combiner training with the initial pose and lane map
specified by the user. We obtain the RAG embedding zrag with Eq. (3), and
then infer the generated scenario through τrag ← D(zi , zrag , zm ).

5     Experiment
In this section, we start with an overview of the experimental setup and details
regarding the implementation of the RealGEN framework. Then we discuss the
baselines, including different types of autoencoders and variants of RealGen,
used for comparison. In the discussion of the findings, we respectively evaluate
the quality of scenario embedding and the generation capability of RAG.

5.1   Settings and Implementation Details
We conducted all training and evaluation with the nuScenes [5] dataset using
the trajdata [34] package for data loading and processing. Each scenario spans
10     W. Ding et al.

a duration of 8 seconds, operating at a frequency of 2 Hz, and encompasses
a maximum of 11 agents. We filter out agents that travel less than 3 meters
in 8 seconds and select 11 agents closest to the ego vehicle. The map contains
100 lanes (each lane has 20 points) that are ordered according to the distance
between the center of the lane and the center of the ego vehicle.
    To train RealGen, we use Adam [36] as the optimizer to update the pa-
rameters of the autoencoder and the combiner. To make the calculation of the
Wasserstein distance efficient, we use the Sinkhorn distance [13], an entropy reg-
ularized approximation of the Wasserstein distance [52], with implementation in
the GeomLoss [19] package.

5.2   Baselines
In the experimental section, we evaluate the following reconstruction-based gen-
erative models as baselines for comparison. Autoencoder (AE) shares the same
behavior encoder, map encoder, and decoder structures as RealGen, serving as
the most straightforward baseline for scenario reconstruction. Contrastive AE
mirrors the structure of the RealGen autoencoder but omits the initial pose
as absolute information. Masked AE is a self-supervised learning baseline,
which has been investigated for trajectory data as described in [9, 12, 56, 58].
To evaluate the controllable generation capability, we select a state-of-the-art
modelLCTGen [49] as the baseline, which takes a high-level agent represen-
tation z and a vector map m as input. We also consider LCTGen w/o z, a
variant model proposed in the original paper to show the reconstruction results
without using the agent information. Given that our method has two phases,
we refer to the autoencoder component specifically as RealGen-AE and the
complete model as RealGen.

5.3   Evaluation of Behavior Embedding
We first evaluate the quality of the learned representation of behavior, which is
critical for the following retrieval and generation processes.
    Visualizing similar and dissimilar scenarios. After training the auto-
encoder with contrastive loss, the distance between behavior embeddings can
be used as an indicator of the similarity of the two scenarios. To validate this
statement, we visualize qualitative examples of using a query to find the most
similar (minimal W2 distance) and dissimilar (maximal W2 distance) scenarios in
Figure 3. We observe that the most similar scenario contains the same behavior
and number of vehicles as in the query scenario.
    Classifying Scene ID with behavior embedding. To further provide
quantitative results on how well the behavior embedding encodes behavior in-
formation, we leverage the Scene ID of the nuScenes dataset. Each scene typically
lasts 20 seconds and our scenario segments last 8 seconds, so we get multiple
segments belonging to the same Scene ID. We assume that the segments having
the same Scene ID have similar behaviors so that we can calculate the accuracy
by using the distance to find the closest segment. In Figure 4, we summarize
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios       11




Fig. 3: Qualitative evaluation of similar and dissimilar scenarios calculated by our
scenario embedding. Rectangles represent the initial poses of vehicles and the lines
represent the future trajectories.


the results in the left part, where top-k means we calculate the accuracy for
the closest k segments. To validate the effectiveness of W2 distance, we also
permute the order of agents in the behavior embedding, which is denoted as
cosine-permuted and W2 -permuted. We find that the cosine distance cannot deal
with the permuted setting, as the order is important when stacking the embed-
ding of agents. Our method performs well in top-1 and top-5 settings but badly
in others, which could be explained by the fact that segments in one scene have
very different behaviors. To validate this, we plot the distance matrix between
segments for 11 scenes in the right part of Figure 4. We find sub-blocks in the
diagonal blocks, indicating that segments are similar in a small time interval but
could be different when the time interval is large.
    Linear probing of behavior                Table 1: Accuracy of linear probing
embedding. Linear probing, a com-           AE Contrastive AE Masked AE RealGen-AE
monly employed method to assess rep- 82.5%           67.1%       86.2%     87.8%
resentations in self-supervised learn-
ing (SSL), involves training a linear classifier using the derived embeddings [27].
To train this classifier, we implemented heuristic rules to assign basic behav-
ioral labels (acceleration, deceleration, stopping, keeping speed, left/right turn)
to each agent’s embedding. The outcomes, along with comparisons with baseline
models, are presented in Table 1. These findings demonstrate that the embed-
dings generated by RealGen surpass all baseline models in terms of accuracy.


5.4   Evaluation of Retrieval Augmented Generation

Evaluating scene-level controllability and quality of scenario generation is an
open problem due to the lack of quantitative metrics. Following most previous
12        W. Ding et al.




Fig. 4: (a) Scene ID accuracy using the behavior embedding with difference distance
metrics. (b) A matrix shows the Wasserstein distance between scenario segments, where
each block contains the segments that belong to the same Scene ID.
Table 2: Results of realism metrics. Recon.-based and Retrieval-based means using
the target scenario and retrieved scenarios as input for generation, respectively.
 Category Method              mADE      mFDE      Speed    Heading     SCR       ORR
            AE               0.18±0.03 0.41±0.06 0.04±0.01 0.10±0.01 0.02±0.00 0.02±0.00
 Recon.     Masked AE        0.16±0.01 0.39±0.01 0.04±0.01 0.09±0.01 0.03±0.00 0.02±0.00
 -based     Contrastive AE   0.92±0.02 1.47±0.04 0.12±0.00 0.36±0.02 0.04±0.00 0.04±0.00
            RealGen-AE       0.31±0.01 0.53±0.01 0.08±0.00 0.15±0.01 0.03±0.00 0.02±0.00
           AE-KNN         14.3±0.03 16.4±0.05 0.57±0.01 0.59±0.02 0.15±0.01 0.15±0.01
           LCTGen         4.76±0.09 6.24±0.08 0.52±0.06 0.57±0.03 0.07±0.01 0.07±0.01
 Retrieval
           LCTGen w/o z   14.2±0.07 16.7±0.09 2.04±0.04 1.42±0.00 0.16±0.02 0.13±0.04
  -based
           RealGen-AE-KNN 13.1±0.06 14.1±0.03 0.46±0.01 0.44±0.00 0.12±0.01 0.11±0.00
           RealGen        1.54±0.04 1.21±0.03 0.21±0.03 0.21±0.01 0.05±0.00 0.04±0.00


work [18, 49, 64], we provide the results of the realism metrics and show the
qualitative results of using RealGen for various downstream tasks. More results
can be found in the appendix.
    Realism of generated scenario. To evaluate the realism of generated sce-
narios, we consider the following metrics and show the results in Table 2. We use
the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [22] to measure the similarity in ve-
locity and direction between the original scenarios and the generated scenarios.
We also compare the mean average displacement error (mADE) and the mean
final displacement error (mFDE) for the average reconstruction performance. To
evaluate scene-level realism, we calculate the scene collision rate (SCR) and the
off-road rate (ORR) following the metrics defined in [49]. The recon-based gener-
ation methods in Table 2 use the behavior of the target scenario as input. For this
category, we compare RealGen-AE, only using the encoder and decoder modules,
with three baseline methods. Due to the additional contrastive term, RealGen-
AE achieves slightly worse performance than AE and Masked AE. However,
RealGen is designed for retrieval-based generation, which uses retrieved scenar-
ios rather than the target scenario as input. To fairly compare the generation
performance, we design two baselines named AE-KNN and RealGen-AE-KNN,
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios            13




Fig. 5: Examples of tag-retrieved scenarios generated by RealGen for six different tags.


which use KNN to find the most similar behavior embedding to the target sce-
nario and use this embedding as input to the decoder for generation. According
to the results, we find that RealGen achieves comparable performance as recon-
based generation and outperforms baselines, which indicates the important role
of the combiner in fusing the information of the retrieved scenarios.
    Generating tag-retrieved sce-
narios. Now we explore the qualita-
tive performance of using RealGen for
tag-retrieved generation. Given a tar-
get behavior tag, we first obtain sev-
eral template scenarios from a small
dataset and use them to retrieve more
scenarios from the training database,
which will be used for generation in
the combiner. Since there is no ex-
isting dataset with tags, we manually
labeled six tags – U-Turn, Overtak- Fig. 6: Examples of generating crash sce-
                                          narios from RealGen. The shadow rectan-
ing, Left Lane Change, Right Lane
                                          gles represent the initial positions of agents.
Change, Left Turn, Right Turn – for
the nuScenes dataset to get template 1349 scenarios. We plot generated scenar-
ios for each tag in Figure 5, where the left part of each example shows the given
initial pose and map and the right part of each example shows the generated
scenario from RealGen.
    Safety-critical scenario gen- Table 3: Safety-critical scenario generation.
eration. Beyond the tag men-              Method        Realgen-AE-R RealGen-R RealGen
tioned above, RealGen demon-
                                     Collision Rate (↑)      0.92        0.83      0.59
strates its capacity for in-context
learning by generating critical and unseen crash scenarios, divergent from those
of the training datasets. This is initiated by manually creating several crash
scenario templates, guided by the scenarios recorded in the NHTSA Crash Re-
port [40]. Subsequently, we generate crash scenarios using existing initial poses
and maps of the dataset. Figure 6 illustrates six instances in which the shad-
owed rectangles denote the initial positions of agents and the red box highlights
14        W. Ding et al.

    Table 4: Results of human evaluation of controllability. (Details in Appendix ??)
Category               Left-Turn Right-Turn Left-Lane-Change Right-Lane-Change    Straight
RealGen Preferred (%)    81.8      91.7          97.8               93.3            100.0
RealGen Score (0-5)   4.27±1.05 4.27±0.69     3.96±1.94         4.17±1.93        3.94±2.27
LCTGen Score (0-5)    2.15±1.44 2.08±1.19     2.42±1.95          2.0±1.96        2.14±2.31


the point of collision. To quantitatively assess the performance of safety-critical
scenarios, we compare RealGen with two baselines. RealGen-AE-R random sam-
ples behavior embeddings in the Realgen-AE model, and RealGen-R random
retrieves behavior embeddings. According to the results in Table 3, we find that
the scenarios generated by RealGen using crash scenarios as templates achieve
the highest collision rate, which means that RealGen has more efficiency.
    Human evaluation of controllability. As there is no automatic way to
evaluate controllability, we follow the protocol in [49] to perform A/B testing
using human evaluation. We report the ratio of our method preferred as well as
the absolute score (0-5) of both our method and the baseline. In Table 4, we find
that scenarios generated by RealGen are highly preferred in most categories.
The absolute score of RealGen is also much higher than that of LCTGen.
    Downstream task evalua-              Table 5: Downstream task evaluation.
tion. A direct downstream task           Method    Original Random Aug. RealGen Aug.
of our method is to use the
                                       mADE (↓)     3.544      2.920       2.309
generated data to augment the collision rate (↓) 0.049         0.037       0.018
training dataset of trajectory
prediction models. We use Autobots [21] as a predictor and report the results
trained on different datasets in Table 5. Original means using the original data in
nuScenes [5], Random Aug. means augmenting the original dataset with Gaussian
noise, and RealGen Aug. means augmenting the original dataset with scenarios
from RealGen. We observe that the model trained with the RealGen dataset
achieves the lowest mADE and collision rate.

6      Conclusion and Limitation
This paper proposes RealGen, a novel framework for traffic scenario generation
that utilizes retrieval-augmented generation. Unlike previous approaches, which
primarily rely on models replicating training distributions, RealGen demon-
strates in-context learning abilities that synthesize scenarios by combining and
modifying provided examples, enabling controlled generation. These scenarios
can be automatically obtained from a retrieval system, which only requires the
users to provide a few template scenarios as examples. We comprehensively eval-
uated the similarity autoencoder model for retrieval and the combiner model for
generation. The findings indicate that RealGen achieves low reconstruction error
and high generation quality.
    The primary limitation of our current method is that the behavior encoder
focuses solely on agent trajectories, neglecting the intricate interactions between
agents and lane maps in complex behaviors. Advancing the feature representation
within the behavior encoder could significantly broaden RealGen’s capacity to
generate diverse and controllable traffic scenarios.
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios            15

Acknowledgments
Wenhao Ding contributed to this paper while being an intern at NVIDIA Re-
search. Ding Zhao was partially supported by the National Science Foundation
under grant CNS-2047454.

References
 1. Ba, J.L., Kiros, J.R., Hinton, G.E.: Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1607.06450 (2016)
 2. Blattmann, A., Rombach, R., Oktay, K., Müller, J., Ommer, B.: Retrieval-
    augmented diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
    35, 15309–15324 (2022)
 3. Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Hoffmann, J., Cai, T., Rutherford, E., Millican, K.,
    Van Den Driessche, G.B., Lespiau, J.B., Damoc, B., Clark, A., et al.: Improving
    language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In: International conference
    on machine learning. pp. 2206–2240. PMLR (2022)
 4. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P., Nee-
    lakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al.: Language models are few-shot
    learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 1877–1901 (2020)
 5. Caesar, H., Bankiti, V., Lang, A.H., Vora, S., Liong, V.E., Xu, Q., Krishnan, A.,
    Pan, Y., Baldan, G., Beijbom, O.: nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous
    driving. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
    pattern recognition. pp. 11621–11631 (2020)
 6. Cai, D., Wang, Y., Bi, W., Tu, Z., Liu, X., Shi, S.: Retrieval-guided dialogue
    response generation via a matching-to-generation framework. In: Proceedings of
    the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
    the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
    IJCNLP). pp. 1866–1875 (2019)
 7. Cao, Y., Xiao, C., Anandkumar, A., Xu, D., Pavone, M.: Advdo: Realistic ad-
    versarial attacks for trajectory prediction. In: European Conference on Computer
    Vision. pp. 36–52. Springer (2022)
 8. Chen, D., Fisch, A., Weston, J., Bordes, A.: Reading wikipedia to answer open-
    domain questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00051 (2017)
 9. Chen, H., Wang, J., Shao, K., Liu, F., Hao, J., Guan, C., Chen, G., Heng,
    P.A.: Traj-mae: Masked autoencoders for trajectory prediction. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2303.06697 (2023)
10. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., Hinton, G.: A simple framework for con-
    trastive learning of visual representations. In: International conference on machine
    learning. pp. 1597–1607. PMLR (2020)
11. Chen, W., Hu, H., Saharia, C., Cohen, W.W.: Re-imagen: Retrieval-augmented
    text-to-image generator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14491 (2022)
12. Cheng, J., Mei, X., Liu, M.: Forecast-mae: Self-supervised pre-training for motion
    forecasting with masked autoencoders. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
    tional Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 8679–8689 (2023)
13. Cuturi, M.: Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Ad-
    vances in neural information processing systems 26 (2013)
14. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
    tional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805
    (2018)
16      W. Ding et al.

15. Ding, W., Chen, B., Li, B., Eun, K.J., Zhao, D.: Multimodal safety-critical sce-
    narios generation for decision-making algorithms evaluation. IEEE Robotics and
    Automation Letters 6(2), 1551–1558 (2021)
16. Ding, W., Lin, H., Li, B., Eun, K.J., Zhao, D.: Semantically adversarial driv-
    ing scenario generation with explicit knowledge integration. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2106.04066 (2021)
17. Ding, W., Xu, M., Zhao, D.: Learning to collide: An adaptive safety-critical sce-
    narios generating method. In: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
    Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE (2020)
18. Feng, L., Li, Q., Peng, Z., Tan, S., Zhou, B.: Trafficgen: Learning to generate
    diverse and realistic traffic scenarios. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on
    Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 3567–3575. IEEE (2023)
19. Feydy, J., Séjourné, T., Vialard, F.X., Amari, S.i., Trouve, A., Peyré, G.: Inter-
    polating between optimal transport and mmd using sinkhorn divergences. In: The
    22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. pp. 2681–
    2690 (2019)
20. Gidaris, S., Singh, P., Komodakis, N.: Unsupervised representation learning by
    predicting image rotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07728 (2018)
21. Girgis, R., Golemo, F., Codevilla, F., Weiss, M., D’Souza, J.A., Kahou, S.E., Heide,
    F., Pal, C.: Latent variable sequential set transformers for joint multi-agent motion
    prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.00563 (2021)
22. Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K.M., Rasch, M.J., Schölkopf, B., Smola, A.: A kernel
    two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 13(1), 723–773 (2012)
23. Gulino, C., Fu, J., Luo, W., Tucker, G., Bronstein, E., Lu, Y., Harb, J., Pan, X.,
    Wang, Y., Chen, X., et al.: Waymax: An accelerated, data-driven simulator for
    large-scale autonomous driving research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08710 (2023)
24. Gutmann, M., Hyvärinen, A.: Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation prin-
    ciple for unnormalized statistical models. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth inter-
    national conference on artificial intelligence and statistics. pp. 297–304. JMLR
    Workshop and Conference Proceedings (2010)
25. Guu, K., Lee, K., Tung, Z., Pasupat, P., Chang, M.: Retrieval augmented language
    model pre-training. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 3929–
    3938. PMLR (2020)
26. Hanselmann, N., Renz, K., Chitta, K., Bhattacharyya, A., Geiger, A.: King: Gener-
    ating safety-critical driving scenarios for robust imitation via kinematics gradients.
    In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 335–352. Springer (2022)
27. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Dollár, P., Girshick, R.: Masked autoencoders are
    scalable vision learners. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
    vision and pattern recognition. pp. 16000–16009 (2022)
28. He, K., Fan, H., Wu, Y., Xie, S., Girshick, R.: Momentum contrast for unsupervised
    visual representation learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
    computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 9729–9738 (2020)
29. Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P.: Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
    neural information processing systems 33, 6840–6851 (2020)
30. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J.: Long short-term memory. Neural computation
    9(8), 1735–1780 (1997)
31. Hospedales, T., Antoniou, A., Micaelli, P., Storkey, A.: Meta-learning in neural
    networks: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
    44(9), 5149–5169 (2021)
RealGen: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios            17

32. Hu, A., Corrado, G., Griffiths, N., Murez, Z., Gurau, C., Yeo, H., Kendall, A.,
    Cipolla, R., Shotton, J.: Model-based imitation learning for urban driving. Ad-
    vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 20703–20716 (2022)
33. Ibrihich, S., Oussous, A., Ibrihich, O., Esghir, M.: A review on recent research in
    information retrieval. Procedia Computer Science 201, 777–782 (2022)
34. Ivanovic, B., Song, G., Gilitschenski, I., Pavone, M.: trajdata: A unified interface
    to multiple human trajectory datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13924 (2023)
35. Kim, J., Choi, S., Amplayo, R.K., Hwang, S.w.: Retrieval-augmented controllable
    review generation. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Com-
    putational Linguistics. pp. 2284–2295 (2020)
36. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)
37. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., Küttler, H.,
    Lewis, M., Yih, W.t., Rocktäschel, T., et al.: Retrieval-augmented generation for
    knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
    33, 9459–9474 (2020)
38. Li, Q., Peng, Z., Feng, L., Duan, C., Mo, W., Zhou, B., et al.: Scenarionet: Open-
    source platform for large-scale traffic scenario simulation and modeling. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2306.12241 (2023)
39. Liu, Q., Yogatama, D., Blunsom, P.: Relational memory-augmented language mod-
    els. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 10, 555–572
    (2022)
40. NHTSA: Nhtsa crash viewer (2023), https://crashviewer.nhtsa.dot.gov/
41. Noroozi, M., Favaro, P.: Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving
    jigsaw puzzles. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 69–84. Springer
    (2016)
42. Oord, A.v.d., Li, Y., Vinyals, O.: Representation learning with contrastive predic-
    tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 (2018)
43. Roshdi, A., Roohparvar, A.: Information retrieval techniques and applications.
    International Journal of Computer Networks and Communications Security 3(9),
    373–377 (2015)
44. Schmidhuber, J.: Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural networks
    61, 85–117 (2015)
45. Shi, S., Jiang, L., Dai, D., Schiele, B.: Motion transformer with global intention
    localization and local movement refinement. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
    cessing Systems 35, 6531–6543 (2022)
46. Shurrab, S., Duwairi, R.: Self-supervised learning methods and applications in
    medical imaging analysis: A survey. PeerJ Computer Science 8, e1045 (2022)
47. Suo, S., Regalado, S., Casas, S., Urtasun, R.: Trafficsim: Learning to simulate
    realistic multi-agent behaviors. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
    Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 10400–10409 (2021)
48. Suo, S., Wong, K., Xu, J., Tu, J., Cui, A., Casas, S., Urtasun, R.: Mixsim: A
    hierarchical framework for mixed reality traffic simulation. In: Proceedings of the
    IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 9622–
    9631 (2023)
49. Tan, S., Ivanovic, B., Weng, X., Pavone, M., Kraehenbuehl, P.: Language condi-
    tioned traffic generation. In: Conference on Robot Learning. pp. 2714–2752. PMLR
    (2023)
50. Tan, S., Wong, K., Wang, S., Manivasagam, S., Ren, M., Urtasun, R.: Scenegen:
    Learning to generate realistic traffic scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 892–901 (2021)
18      W. Ding et al.

51. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser,
    Ł., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information pro-
    cessing systems 30 (2017)
52. Villani, C., et al.: Optimal transport: old and new, vol. 338. Springer (2009)
53. Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y., Manzagol, P.A.: Extracting and composing
    robust features with denoising autoencoders. In: Proceedings of the 25th interna-
    tional conference on Machine learning. pp. 1096–1103 (2008)
54. Wang, J., Pun, A., Tu, J., Manivasagam, S., Sadat, A., Casas, S., Ren, M., Ur-
    tasun, R.: Advsim: Generating safety-critical scenarios for self-driving vehicles.
    In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
    Recognition. pp. 9909–9918 (2021)
55. Wang, Z., Nie, W., Qiao, Z., Xiao, C., Baraniuk, R., Anandkumar, A.: Retrieval-
    based controllable molecule generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.11126 (2022)
56. Wu, P., Majumdar, A., Stone, K., Lin, Y., Mordatch, I., Abbeel, P., Rajeswaran,
    A.: Masked trajectory models for prediction, representation, and control. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2305.02968 (2023)
57. Xu, P., Patwary, M., Shoeybi, M., Puri, R., Fung, P., Anandkumar, A., Catanzaro,
    B.: Megatron-cntrl: Controllable story generation with external knowledge using
    large-scale language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00840 (2020)
58. Yang, Y., Zhang, Q., Gilles, T., Batool, N., Folkesson, J.: Rmp: A random mask
    pretrain framework for motion prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08989 (2023)
59. Yang, Z., Li, L., Lin, K., Wang, J., Lin, C.C., Liu, Z., Wang, L.: The dawn of lmms:
    Preliminary explorations with gpt-4v (ision). arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17421
    (2023)
60. Zhang, C., Zhang, C., Song, J., Yi, J.S.K., Zhang, K., Kweon, I.S.: A survey
    on masked autoencoder for self-supervised learning in vision and beyond. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2208.00173 (2022)
61. Zhang, C., Tu, J., Zhang, L., Wong, K., Suo, S., Urtasun, R.: Learning realistic
    traffic agents in closed-loop. In: 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning (2023)
62. Zhang, X., Bosselut, A., Yasunaga, M., Ren, H., Liang, P., Manning, C.D.,
    Leskovec, J.: Greaselm: Graph reasoning enhanced language models. In: Inter-
    national conference on learning representations (2021)
63. Zhong, Z., Rempe, D., Chen, Y., Ivanovic, B., Cao, Y., Xu, D., Pavone, M., Ray,
    B.: Language-guided traffic simulation via scene-level diffusion. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2306.06344 (2023)
64. Zhong, Z., Rempe, D., Xu, D., Chen, Y., Veer, S., Che, T., Ray, B., Pavone,
    M.: Guided conditional diffusion for controllable traffic simulation. In: 2023 IEEE
    International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 3560–3566.
    IEEE (2023)
